CP/Mish
=======

What?
-----

CP/Mish is an open source sort-of-CP/M distribution for the 8080 and Z80
architectures (although for technical reasons currently it only works on the
Z80).

It contains no actual Digital Research code. Instead, it's a collection of
third party modules which replicate it, all with proper open source licenses,
integrated with a build system that should make it easy to work with.

What you get is a working CP/M 2.2 clone consisting of:

  - ZSDOS as the BDOS replacement
  - ZCPR1 as the CCP replacement
  - open source BIOSes for the supported platforms
  - various tools copying the functionality of the standard CP/M tools (some
    of them [written by me](http://cowlark.com/2019-06-01-cpm-asm)
  - [R.T. Russell's superb BBC Basic](http://www.bbcbasic.co.uk/bbcbasic.html),
    Z80 edition (with integrated assembler)
  - Richard Surwilo's Z8E full-screen symbolic debugger
  - a build system which provides a turnkey cross-compilation system for
    producing bootable disk images for any of the supported platforms
  - a classic CP/M syntax assembler and linker for cross-compiling ancient
    source
  - a simple but useful vi-adjacent editor called qe (written by myself)
  - an emulator for testing CP/M binaries
  - source for _everything_; no binaries are in this distribution
  - bugs

Currently it supports these platforms:

  - [the Amstrad NC200 laptop](arch/nc200/README.md)
  - [the Kaypro II](arch/kayproii/README.md)
  - [the Brother LW-30 typewriter (and probably
	others)](arch/brotherop2/README.md)
  - [the Brother WP-2450DS typewriter (and probably
	others)](arch/wp2450ds/README.md)

If anyone wants to contribute any more BIOSes, I'd love pull requests!


Why?
----

CP/M is Digital Research's seminal desktop operating system from 1977 that
for a decade dominated the personal computer market. It's of enormous
historical value and there's a vast wealth of programs written for it. It's
even useful today: both to study (as aa superb example of sheer minimalism)
but also to use; the Z80 is a common target for homebrew computers, and CP/M
is the obvious operating system to run on one.

Don't believe me? Watch this:

[![Video of me doing stuff on an NC200](http://img.youtube.com/vi/FGWshrMZcCc/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FGWshrMZcCc)

However, while you can get the source and binaries today, the [license it's
released](http://www.gaby.de/cpm/license.html) with is encumbered and it
can't be distributed outside (the amazing) [Unofficial CP/M Web
Site](http://www.gaby.de/cpm/); so it's useful as a reference, but you can't
distribute CP/M images with, e.g., emulators.

CP/Mish is not CP/M, but it's enough like CP/M to run CP/M programs and do
CP/M things. And, if you want the real CP/M, CP/Mish uses the standard
interaces so you can just drop in a Digital Research BDOS and CCP and it'll
work.


How?
----

You pretty much need a Unix --- I developed it on Linux. You'll need to
install the dependencies. These are the names of the Debian packages:

  - netpbm
  - cpmtools
  - lua5.1
  - ninja-build
  - libz80ex-dev
  - libreadline-dev

You _also_ need to install [the Amsterdam Compiler
Kit](https://github.com/davidgiven/ack), which is used as the C compiler
(yes, some of the tools are written in C). You'll have to install it from
source yourself as it's not in Debian.

Additionally, if you are building on macOS (formerly Mac OS X) you need
to `brew install coreutils` and `export PATH="/usr/local/opt/coreutils/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"`
before building to use the correct `dd` version.

Once in place, just do:

    make

...and it should build. You'll end up with some `.img` files in the project
directory which are the bootable disk images.

If you want more detailed build instructions, try [the script used for
automatic
builds](https://github.com/davidgiven/cpmish/blob/master/.github/workflows/ccpp.yml),
which has got the exact commands needed buried inside it.

For information on what to do with these, look in the READMEs in the
individual [`arch/*`](https://github.com/davidgiven/cpmish/tree/master/arch)
directories.


Where?
------

- [Check out the GitHub repository](http://github.com/davidgiven/cpmish) and
build from source. (Alternatively, you can download a source snapshot from
[the latest release](https://github.com/davidgiven/cpmish/releases/latest),
but I suggect the GitHub repositories better because I don't really intend to
make formal releases often.) Build instructions as in the README.

- [Ask a question by creating a GitHub
issue](https://github.com/davidgiven/cpmish/issues/new), or just email me
directly at [dg@cowlark.com](mailto:dg@cowlark.com). (But I'd prefer you
opened an issue, so other people can see them.)


Who?
----

There's a lot of stuff here, and while I assembled it, I didn't write all of
it. See the licensing section below for the full list.

For the distribution work and the bits I did write --- I am David Given. Feel
free to send me email at [dg@cowlark.com](mailto:dg@cowlark.com). You may
also [like to visit my website](http://cowlark.com); there may or may not be
something interesting there.


License?
--------

This is a big aggregation of software, all with its own licensing. It contains
GPLv2-licensed code, so as a whole it must be distributed under the terms of
the GPL version 2 (because complying with the GPL also complies with the
license of everything else). See the `COPYING.gpl2` file for more details.

Specifically:

  - Everything _not_ in `arch` or `third_party` is Â© 2018-2019 David Given and
	is distributable under the terms of the 2-clause BSD license. See the
	`COPYING.cpmish` file for more details.

  - `arch/nc200` and `arch/kayproii` were written by me and are covered by the
	main CP/Mish license.

  - `third_party/bbcbasic` contains a copy of R.T.Russell's Z80 BBC Basic,
	which is distributable under the terms of the zlib license. See the
	`third_party/bbcbasic/COPYING` file for more details.

  - `third_party/libstb` contains a copy of Sean Barrett's stb library, which
	is partially in the public domain and partially distributable under the
	Expat license. See the `third_party/libstb/COPYING` file for more details.

  - `third_party/zcpr1` contains a (modified) copy of the ZCPR1 CCP
	replacement, written by the CCP-GROUP, which is in the public domain. See
	the `third_party/zcpr1/COPYING` file for more details.

  - `third_party/zmac` contains a (modified) copy of the ZMAC macro assembler,
	written by George Phillips, Thierry Join, Mark Rison, Russell Marks, Colin
	Kelley, John Providenza and Bruce Norskog (some time in 1978!) --- and
	probably others. To the best of my knowledge this is in the public domain.
	See the `third_party/zmac/COPYING` file for more details.

  - `third_party/ld80` contains a (modified) copy of the LD80 macro assembler,
	written by (as far as I know) George Philips and Gabor Kiss. It is in the
	public domain.

  - `third_party/zsdos` contains a (modified) copy of the ZSDOS CP/M BDOS
	clone, written by lots of people but mainly Cameron W. Cotrill and Harold
	F. Bower. This is available under the terms of the General Public License
	version 2. See the `third_party/zsdos/COPYING` file for more details.

  - `third_party/z8e` contains a (modified) copy of the Z8E symbolic
    debugger, mostly written by Richard Surwilo and Jon Saxton. It is in the
	public domain.

